Ladies and gentlemen,
please welcome manager
for the printing group,
Paul Danbold.
Thank you.
That's me.
How many people came to the
printing session this morning?
I reckon that's most.
So you saw a lot of the things
that we can do with printing,
specifically on 10 this morning,
and the focus for this session is
going to be on how you do that.
So we're going to be
looking at some code.
We'll start off and take you
through some of the session APIs.
If you've got CarbonLib, let's see,
the early 1.1 builds,
you'll have probably seen
them in the header files.
Certainly they're in DP3 and DP4,
so we would like you to start using them,
and we'll take you through those.
The next thing we'll do is we'll
show you how we were able to
display the print dialogs as sheets,
and that's something
you saw this morning.
Then I'm going to talk a little
bit about the issues to do with the
Print dialogs and issues for people
who want to do non-printing type
applications but still using the
printing system or printing without a UI.
We'll talk a little bit
about Post-Crit printing.
Then, I guess the main topic for
today is how to write a plug-in,
how to add a panel to the print dialog.
If we have time,
we'll have a Q&A session.
Although I should point out now we've got
a feedback forum later on this afternoon.
Quite a lot of the things we've got
to show you today don't look too good
at 36 point on a PowerPoint slide,
so we'll be using our
favorite application,
Project Builder,
and taking you through some code.
So, back by popular demand,
to talk about the session APIs,
we've got Alan,
Alan Beck from the printing team.
He's going to take that first topic.
Thank you, Paul.
So basically, what I'm,
first I want to go through is
basically the major objects that are,
an application would deal with
when you're printing through
the Carbon Printing Manager.
The first two are basically the PM page,
let's see, the PM page format and
the PM print settings.
These basically replace the
old 128 byte print record,
which we are so glad to get rid of.
The PM page format is basically,
Relevant to all the options that are
dealing with the page setup dialog
and basically is how it relates to
imaging of the document's pages.
That is basically what
should be saved in the,
what is being saved in
the page format object.
This object should be flattened
and saved with the document,
kind of like the old print record was.
And another point to be made about this
is you can use the accessor functions to
get the data out of the object without
or outside of the PMBGN and PMEND calls.
And one last thing about this is it is
extensible with the application data.
Then we have the print settings
again which basically is normally
not saved with the document.
And here again it is extensible
with application data.
Thirdly is the PM Print Context.
Basically this is an opaque
graph port that is used to image
pages within the print loop.
Then we come over to
the PM Print session.
This is the major change that we
have added to the PM application,
.hpm application since last WWDC.
It enables the application to have
multiple concurrent printing sessions.
is also needed to enable
the document modal printing
which I demoed this morning.
For multi-threaded apps,
each thread can have one or more
of these sessions attached to it,
but multi-threaded apps can only,
a session cannot be shared
between these multiple threads.
PM page format and PM print
settings objects can be shared
between multiple print sessions.
And lastly, I'd like to point out that
A session can only display
one printing dialog at a time.
In other words, you can't have a,
in the document modal case,
you can't have one document
showing a print dialog,
another document showing
another print dialog,
sharing the same session.
That's not allowed.
Then we go to the PM dialog,
which is basically our
object for the print dialogs.
And then lastly we have the PM printer,
which basically represents
the target printer.
You use the accessor functions
of this object to get specific
features about the printer,
such as driver version, resolution,
PPD file that's associated with it.
Now I'd like to go talk about the
differences between the mapping between
the session and non-session APIs.
Basically,
as you can tell from this slide,
there's basically a one-to-one mapping.
PMBegin,
This is maps to PM create session, PMN,
maps to PM release.
And basically the rest of them are
the same API just with the session
added to the name and the session,
the PM session as basically the first
parameter to any of these calls.
With that, I would like to go over to
demo machine and show you
A side by side comparison of a PM session
and PM non session and PM session apps.
Here we are.
Okay.
Basically,
here we have... This is the print loop.
This is our sample print
loop in the non-session case,
and here we should have...
The session with using sessions.
So basically, they're basically the same.
Let's scroll down a bit.
There's this.
Okay, here's the main.
So everything starts.
Let's go over here and scroll down here.
There we go.
Basically here we have the
PM Begin on this side and the
PM Create session over here.
And then we basically go down
on through and then we basically
convert the old print record and
then do the page setup dialog.
Over here it's the same thing except
we have PM session convert old print
record which you can see passes in the
print session as the first parameter.
And do the same thing
down here with page setup.
And print dialog.
Now we'll just go on down to the,
basically the same thing.
We have,
basically in the page setup dialog we're
trying to create a page format object.
Then basically, and this one here is
not a session based API.
And let's go over here, actually this,
Basically,
the non-session way of doing it is
doing a PM new page format and with
sessions it is a PM create page format.
And then basically we go down
and validate the page format and
then here in the session case
we just pass the print session.
And then the same thing
with the print dialog.
Basically,
we try to create a new PM setting.
Here we do a new print settings.
And here we do it to create with
the session API and the new print
settings is the non-session API.
And do a validate.
One thing that we would like
to encourage our developers,
application developers to do is before
putting up the print dialog to basically
set the page range in the page format.
This allows us when we put up the
dialog to give some clue to the user
as in the length of the document.
So if he ever wants to do a page range,
he actually,
we can actually tell the user, you know,
what the last page of the document is.
And they will get some clue
as to what they might want to
input into those two edit boxes.
Then here we just do the print
dialog and here we do the.
PM Session Print Dialog.
And then another thing I want
to talk to you is about the new,
basically how we're
recommending the new Print Loop.
[Transcript missing]
And then basically get the first page.
Another thing we want to make sure that
you remember to do is to only print
the pages that the user has specified.
Don't expect the printing system
to skip pages that are not in the
page range that the user specified.
So we will print every page that is
spooled to us or that is imaged to us.
Then basically,
here's the actual print loop.
Here we have the begin document,
PM session begin document,
PM session end document.
Basically then we loop through the pages,
start the PM begin page,
and over here is the
PM session begin page.
Another thing that you have to make
sure you do is make sure you set the
port before drawing each of the pages.
You cannot guarantee that the port is
the correct port during your draw page.
So you have to remember to
make sure you set the port.
Basically here we do the draw page
and then we start backing it out
which is the PM session end page.
End document and then basically
at the end report any errors.
One thing I do want to remind you of is,
another thing I want to remind you of,
is the objects are ref counted.
So basically you can see here when
we're done doing the print loop we
do a release of the page format,
a release of the print settings,
and finally a release of the
print session that you've created.
Ref counting is happening,
so we want to make sure,
remember to release the
objects that you've created.
And that's basically all I would like
to talk to you about the print loop.
If you go back to the slides.
So basically some summary points,
hints and tips for Carbon printing.
As I said before,
remember to set the printing port
with each call to PMBegin page,
after the call to PMBegin page.
Remember to spool only the
pages selected by the user.
We will print every page
that is spooled to us.
The third point is on Mac OS X,
let us display the
schooling progress dialog.
We will be putting up
the progress dialog.
And that will be the way
that the user will be able to
cancel the spooling of the job.
And then call PM session set
error to report any errors
that occur during page drawing.
We cannot detect every error that you may
encounter when you're drawing your pages,
such as QD errors or
something of the sort.
So therefore,
make sure that you set the-- if
you call PM session set error,
then the print loop-- we will
cancel out of the print loop
and you can deal with the error.
That's basically all on
the basic Carbon printing.
Now I'd like to talk
about the printing dialog.
Getting the printing dialog
to show up as sheets.
Basically, we have two new APIs that
we're asking developers to use.
The first one is PM Session Use Sheets.
Basically, three basic parameters.
The first one is the session,
which I talked about.
The second one is the document window.
That is the document window that you
want the sheet to appear attached to.
Basically, it's your document window.
The third parameter is basically a
Proc Pointer, or UPP,
and this is what gets called when the
User dismisses the dialog.
One thing to remember about
when you're using Sheets,
your call to PM session print dialog is
that it will return immediately to you.
As in before, if you don't use this call,
basically the call to PM print
dialog will not return until the
user has dismissed the dialog.
But if you're using Sheets,
it will return immediately to you and
this sheet done proc will get called
when the user dismisses the dialog.
And this is a sample of a
sheet done callback proc.
What we give back to you when
the user misses the dialog is
basically the print session again.
The document window that the
dialog is attached to again so
you can get any data you need to.
And the last parameter is accepted
which basically did the user
cancel or print out of the dialog.
Now what I would like to do
again is show you how easy it is,
if you go back to the demo machine,
how easy it is to convert your app
To using sheets,
if you're already using the
session APIs and you have your
application split up correctly,
or factored, not correctly,
but factored in a way
that makes this easy.
Basically, this is basically the same
print loop that I showed before.
The only...where is it?
Beginning, of course.
The difference is when
we make the window,
we are going to save some stuff
off into a document info record.
Basically we're saving off
the page format and the...
Other things that we may need and setting
it to the rough count in the window.
That way during our callback we will
be able to extract this information
Out of the window.
So basically let me just run
it first to show you that
when you're not using Sheets.
Just go ahead and run it.
Just basically, you know,
hello world sample app.
Go to print and it's the modal,
application modal.
It is, it's a
You know,
it is truly the only application model,
unlike 8 and 9.
Where did it go?
There it is.
So we'll just cancel all this and quit.
So to make this use Sheets,
what I will do
And here it is.
Before I call PM session print dialog,
I am going to basically create a UPP,
or create my dialog done, proc UPP.
Make the call to PM session use sheets,
which basically I'm giving
it this print session,
the parent window that
I wanted to display against,
and our UPP.
And then I want to comment out these two
lines where the print loop was actually
done because this will be called,
I will show you,
this instead will be called
in our callback proc.
Which is right above this.
Basically here's our
print dialog done proc.
Basically if it's accepted
the user said print,
I extract our document info pointer
out of the refcon and if I got the
information I just do the print loop,
passing in the page
format and print settings.
So with that done I can just compile it.
"It's linking and it's done.
Okay, now we can run it.
And if I do print, magically,
we are now printing it as a sheet.
Everything you get from sheets are there.
[Transcript missing]
If your print loop is factored
out of showing your print dialog,
and you're already using sessions,
there is not that much more
work needed to get the print
dialog to show as sheets.
So if we go back to the slides,
I'd like to summarize.
Go back to the slides.
I'd like to summarize basically some of
the key points of using dialog sheets.
First point is PM session page,
setup dialog,
and PM session print log return
immediately to the caller.
That means the values that the PM print
settings and PM page format objects that
are passed into it are not really valid
until your callback proc is called.
That's the next point is basically
they're not valid until your
sheet done proc is called.
And last point about dialog sheets,
printing dialogs that are customized
by the append-dibble method
will not be shown as sheets.
Even if the call is made to use sheets,
there's a different
API which is dialog main,
dialog init, dialog main.
Those calls will go through the normal
Well,
we'll execute normally and basically the
dialogs will appear as the modal dialogs.
With that, I'd like to hand back to Paul.
Paul, where are you?
Oh, there.
And he will take you about
some of these interface issues.
Okay,
so I'm going to try not to confuse you.
I'll probably confuse myself.
I'm going to try to go through some user
interface issues with Carbon printing.
There's a couple of things that
have come up in discussions with
developers in the past year or so.
I think it's worth going
through some of these.
There are some developers who want to
print without user interface at all.
There are others who decide that the
page setup dialogue doesn't make sense
for them because they have their own
document format dialogue or equivalent.
And there are others that
want to do things like,
for example, configure a printer or
download fonts to a printer.
They want to use the printing system,
but they have no need for any
of our user interface elements.
So I'll start off with just a reminder
of a point I made this morning that,
like many other things in Carbon,
we've decided,
or rather it's been decided,
that we should split our headers
and our frameworks into two.
So we have PM application,
which used to contain everything,
now just contains the function
prototypes for all the page
setup and print dialog calls.
Pretty much everything else
has been put into PM core.
So there's all the accessor functions,
all the functions to create and
deal with page format objects
and print settings objects.
And last of all are
constants and typedefs,
etc., in PM definitions.
So if you have got need
to print without a UI,
there's no need for
you to compile against,
link, or load the UI-related framework.
Now, this is where I'm going
to get tripped up,
but I'm going to attempt to
avoid stating the obvious,
but to explain why we have
a page setup dialogue,
why we have a print dialogue,
why the two are different,
and why it's not a good idea to
try to link the two together,
but what we're trying to do to address
some of the needs that you have.
So, simply put,
the page setup dialogue is all about
defining the parameters of the logical
page into which your application
is going to image its document.
I think most people understand that,
but obviously for a lot of users,
they associate page setup
with what they're going to do
subsequently at print time.
So, it makes sense for them to pick a
paper size as their document size.
And for that reason,
we have a pop-up in the page
setup dialogue which lists
printers so that you can format a
document for a particular printer,
and we have a paper size pop-up,
scaling orientation, etc.
So, that's well known.
And I think well understood and
related to by the average user.
And in theory,
those settings are quite independent
of what you'll do at print time.
And of course,
the print dialogue is for things that
really have very little to do with how
the contents of the document are imaged.
You pick the number of
copies in the page range,
etc.
The two are distinct, but of course,
the distinction is often probably
lost on users of some applications.
And because...
users quite often, I guess,
decide that they're going to print
to a different printer at print time.
Some applications have allowed you to
play switcheroo and get back to the
page setup dialog from the print dialog.
We're going to try to address
this issue by providing an API and
providing a facility for you
to load a paper selection PDE,
in other words,
an extra panel in the print dialog,
which can be used, as I said,
to pick a paper size,
to pick an orientation, possibly scaling,
et cetera, and to avoid the need to ever
switch back to page setup.
So, not in DP4,
but in a subsequent release,
we will add another API to the growing
list of APIs we have for printing.
It will allow you to tell the
printing system to load this panel,
and I think it will take care of the
need that some of you have felt in the
past to provide a button to take you
back to page setup from the print dialog.
So, there's a couple of
repercussions of doing this.
If you can pick a paper type
and orientation at print time,
maybe you think you don't
need a page setup dialog.
And there's some applications,
which I mentioned,
have their own document setup
or document formatting dialogs,
which often overlap the functionality
of the page setup dialog.
So, we are quite happy if you choose to
live without a page setup dialog if
it doesn't make sense for your users.
If you do that, though,
you've got to make two choices.
You can either call the PM application
APIs to emulate what happens at
page setup time to set a page size,
or rather a paper size,
as scaling and orientation.
Or you can bypass the thing
altogether and call this API,
which we've got listed here,
PMSetAdjustedPageRect,
which just goes straight to the heart
of things and defines a logical page.
And then you can also call
the PMPageFormat object,
which is a very simple application,
into which your application can
image its document contents.
But the thing is that you do have to call
either the APIs that emulate what happens
at the page setup time or this other API,
because you can't go
into the print dialog.
And you certainly can't go to
print if you haven't created
a valid PMPageFormat object.
If you do this sort of thing, of course,
you're incurring page to paper
mapping code at print time because,
of course,
you're now allowed to create a document
which doesn't map cleanly to the
pages you've decided to print it on.
You can decide, of course,
whether scaling is appropriate to
fit the document to the paper or
whether you want to clip or tile.
There are various solutions.
What we're going to do in the
Print Center application is provide
a UI so that the user generically can
tell the printing system how you should,
by default, deal with these page to
paper mapping issues.
Maybe I'm printing to an A4 printer
and I'm always getting documents
that were formatted for US letter.
Well,
I might just say that I want the printing
system to always scale the pages for me.
I would do that via Print Center.
Of course, applications might want to
get into control of this,
so we'll also be adding an API, again,
post-DP4,
but it would allow you to tell the
printing system how you want us
to do the page to paper mapping.
So hopefully that addresses some of
the issues that have been floating
around between the developers
and Apple over the last year.
Last set of issues to do with printing,
as I mentioned, is
What if you want to write a utility
that downloads fonts to a printer?
What happens if you want to write a--?
A utility to configure a printer
or to calibrate a printer.
In the past,
people have written standalone
applications to do that.
And in the past, a lot of applications,
sorry, a lot of printers have had a nice
user-friendly AppleTalk connection.
And that has been fairly straightforward.
But now we're dealing with printers.
They have USB connections.
They have, I think in the future,
we'll see a lot of FireWire printers.
You've got different network protocols.
So if you're writing
one of these utilities,
you've got to face the fact that you
might have to communicate with a printer.
You might have to communicate with
a printer over various channels.
And then you look at Tioga and you say,
well,
we've got all these nice IO modules.
Why can't we just use those?
And our answer is that, well,
maybe you could and we could publicize
the APIs that host IO modules
and printer browser modules,
et cetera.
But our preferred solution is to
Let you write plug-ins for
Print Center so that if you need
to write a font downloading utility
or printer calibration utility,
you do that as a plug-in instead
of a standalone application.
So we'd encourage you if you're
in that sort of business,
come and talk to us or email us and
let us know what you want to do.
And of course,
I think long term we may have
to open up some of these APIs,
but certainly short term our
strategy is to use Print Center as
a host for those sort of operations.
The last thing we've got
here on the UI front is
It's really a word of warning
to anybody who wants to print
without a user interface.
There are APIs that we've provided.
They're in PM Core that
allow you to do things,
the obvious things,
like set the number of
copies you want to print,
set the page range.
But of course, you'll notice,
we haven't provided APIs so that
you can set layout options for doing
nup or printing with a cover page,
et cetera.
And we could add those, of course.
But it's not in our plans.
If you think you want to print
without the print dialog,
and you need access to
that sort of functionality,
then you should talk to us.
Of course, there is a workaround,
which is use a UI, create those settings,
save them off as flattened
print settings objects,
and then use them in your
UILess printing utility.
But I think you realize that
for basic UILess printing,
you shouldn't have the full
set of features that you get
if you display a print dialog.
Okay, my second topic is for people who
I either like to generate their
own postscript or occasionally
find themselves printing documents
containing postscript like EPS graphics.
And it might be interesting
just to get a show of hands,
how many people write applications
that generate their own postscript?
Fair few.
Maybe 20, 30 people in the audience.
And how many of you have applications
which can take an EPS graphic
into a document and then you
have to deal with printing that?
Okay, about the same number.
Okay, so as you probably know,
When you print through,
or I think as I pointed out,
when you print through Tioga on X,
you're effectively printing to a
Quick Draw printer because by default,
we turn Quick Draw into PDF and then
we turn PDF into Post Script or Bits.
So if you want to generate your
own postscript or if you want
to hand EPS into a spool file,
you're going to have to use some
of the APIs that I've listed here.
And I'll take you through
them fairly quickly.
First call is something we put
in the original version of the
Carbon Printing header file.
PM is PostScript driver.
On Mac OS 8 and 9, if you call that,
all the Carbon Printing
manager does is just check the
WDEV field of the print record,
the current driver, and if it's 3,
you know you're printing
for the LaserWriter driver
or maybe Adobe's driver.
And we'll return true as
a return for that call.
If you call that routine on 10, though,
it'll always return false because,
as I said, by default,
we're a Quick Draw--we behave
as a Quick Draw printer and we
only turn Quick Draw calls at
the bottleneck level into PDF.
So what do you do about it?
Well--
You should start looking at
what we call the document format
APIs and there are four of them.
First one on the list is get document
format generation and what that will
do is that will return to you the
list of spool file formats that the
print job creator and the converter
are able to generate for you.
Get document format generation actually
returns to you the current flavor of
spool file format that will be generated.
And likely as not,
the result of that call will be PDF.
Actually, we return a MIME type,
but the result will tell you
that it's PDF by default.
Set document format generation is
a way to tell the printing system,
I want a particular spool file format.
So you can specify PDF.
You can also specify
picked with PostScript.
And we are architected to support
other spool file formats going forward.
[Transcript missing]
The last batch of API's
pretty straightforward.
They make it a little bit
more easy to use the old
PostScript pick comment mechanisms.
Using these in your page drawing code,
you can insert PostScript into
the spool file.
And in a moment I'll show you a
little bit of code to demonstrate
how those document format APIs work.
I'm going to talk about
one more issue here first.
So the previous APIs were all about
putting PostScript in the spool file
and they're really talking about
doing things with PostScript at the
page level that are difficult or
impossible to do with Quick Draw.
And that only goes so far.
And there are people who want to have
finer control over the PostScript they
put into the spool file and the
PostScript that gets sent to the printer.
The common case is you want to add
your own proc set in the prolog of
the job or you want to get in there
and change or add PostScript to the
document or page setup parts of the
PostScript file because your UI for
printing allows you to do things
like invoke some trapping in the rip,
for example.
So we need a way beyond the APIs I just
showed you to tell the printing system
to put PostScript in different ways.
sections of the final output.
The prototype shown here
is a work in progress.
So we may change the name,
but I think the arguments
are pretty solid.
Basically, it's a way for you,
in your printing code,
to add a bunch of PostScript snippets to
the job and send it downstream so that
those PostScript snippets can be added
at appropriate places in the final output
that's sent to the PostScript printer.
And
That CFArray is an array
of CFDictionary's and each
CFDictionary contains a tag or a
keyword and a snippet of postscript.
And if you look at the tech
note that's mentioned here,
that's all about writing
PostScript output filters
for LaserWriter 8.7,
you will see that,
certainly at the back of the tech note,
there's a big long set of tables
which list all these tags.
And they map pretty closely to Adobe's
document structuring conventions.
They identify specific
points in the PostScript job.
And basically all you would need to do
is create a list of PostScript snippets
that you want inserted at these
points in the PostScript file and
hand that to the printing system.
Basically attach it to the print
settings object when you're printing.
And what we will do at the server
side of Tioga when we get this
dictionary is we will dutifully go
and insert your PostScript snippets
in the PostScript stream
that we send to the printer.
If you're interested in
using the PostScript script,
you can go to the
post.script.com/postscript.
And if you're interested
in using this API,
you should certainly talk to us
because it's a work in progress.
It obviously has use for
high-end printing applications.
I think I know who you guys are,
but just in case I miss anybody,
make it known that you're interested
in this API and we'll work with you and
get it right for the first time it's
introduced into probably the next version
of Mac OS X that goes out to developers.
Lastly, if we can just switch
over to the demo machine.
Which demo machine?
Is it this one?
Okay.
I'm just going to show you that
some of those document format calls
to show you how easy it is to,
if I can find it.
Bear with me a moment.
Sample code?
Ah, Paul prints sample.
Okay.
So, hopefully that point says okay.
Find is my friend.
Well, we don't have a pop-up
to get to functions.
Okay.
All I'm going to show you here is the
sort of code that you would use if you
wanted to tell the printing system to
generate a PIC with PostScript spool
file instead of a PDF spool file.
The first point I want to
make clear is that if you're
going to use code like this,
you don't want to be
calling this inside your,
certainly not inside your page
drawing part of the print loop.
You need to call this before you
even invoke the print dialog because
you're telling us to generate a
PIC with PostScript spool file.
When we invoke the print dialog,
we need to know whether we
can enable the preview button.
And we of course know how to preview PDF,
but we don't have anything right now
which will preview PIC with PostScript.
So if you've called the API to tell
us to generate a non-PDF spool file,
we'll be disabling the preview button.
And then it's an exercise for
the reader to write your own
pic with PostScript Previewer.
So, the first interesting call
is to PM session get format,
get document format supported.
Basically, here we're just providing,
we're just getting back a list.
It's an array of CFStrings that we
get back as a result of calling this.
And what's happening under the
hood is that we're going to the
printer module and the converter
that belongs to the current printer,
which is associated with
the current print session,
finding out what it can do and
returning that list of supported
spool file formats to the caller.
Next,
we're just going to go through this list.
We see how many are supported.
Typically,
if you've got a PostScript printer
as your current printer,
num supported formats
will probably be three.
And three is because the first result
will be the default spool file format,
and the second one will be PDF,
and the third one will probably
be picked with PostScript.
But you want to make sure.
So we go through this array,
and we check each entry
in the array to see if...
It matches the string defined by
KPM document format picked PS,
which is defined in PM definitions.
And that's defined as a MIME type,
so it's application/pick_ps.
If we find a match,
let me call this routine,
pmset document format generation.
And let me just scroll
across a little bit here.
What we're doing is we're saying,
for this print session,
I want you to generate a pick
with PostScript spool file,
so I want you to go into
LaserWrite rate compatibility mode.
And I didn't expand upon it,
but this third argument is there
to provide you with a list of
graphic contexts that you're going
to be using to draw your pages.
By default, and null means the default,
I'm just going to be using a quick
draw context to draw my pages.
But I can provide it with,
I can tell the printing system,
I'm going to draw my
pages with core graphics,
so I'll just tell it that I want
it to core graphics context.
Or I can say I want to
use a combo of the two,
so I can use both quick draw
and core graphics to image my
document during the print loop.
And I think if you went
to earlier sessions,
you'll know that a lot of the core
graphics APIs are being opened up for you
to use even within Carbon applications.
That's pretty much it.
The rest of this routine just
cleans up and higher up in the code,
but I don't think I need to
show you in the page drawing
portion of this sample code,
we emit PostScript and that
goes into the spool file.
I think we can go back to
the slides for a moment.
Just to summarize,
for typical applications printing on X,
Tioga appears as a quick draw
printer so you can't send
postscript via pic comments.
PDF is the mainstream spool
file format and we'd rather
everybody use PDF of course.
It's got lots of advantages like you can
preview it and it's page independent,
etc.
and resolution independent.
If you want to generate
your own postscript,
and certainly we understand a lot
of applications today do that and
will probably do that for a while,
we are allowing you to do that and that's
where those document format APIs come in.
And lastly, if you want to do more
advanced PostScript printing,
the prototype API that
I showed on a previous slide,
we will be introducing that.
If you think you're going to use it,
then let us know because we'll
work with you and make sure
the API meets your needs.
And now,
We're going to go on to
something very exciting.
We're going to talk about how to
write a plug-in to extend the print
dialog or the page setup dialog.
And for that,
I'm going to bring Mike Conley on stage.
He's going to take you
through all the nifty code.
So first I'll thank Paul for leaving
me with plenty of time to provide
you in eye-glazing detail some of
the code and information about how
to write printing dialog extensions
for Tioga printing dialogs.
So you may have remembered this slide
from the beginning of the session,
or the first session this morning.
And I won't go into too
much detail about it,
except as I need to pad
the rest of the session.
The first method which
is no longer supported,
as you know, or not no longer supported,
but is no longer encouraged,
is the append-dittle method
of extending a dialog.
And we won't talk about that much because
everybody knows how to do that and you
know what the downsides on that are,
which are basically you don't get
sheets and you don't get status in the
status panel and all that good stuff.
The print dialog extensions are
the preferred way of extending
dialogs in Tioga and the new
Mac OS X printing manager.
There's only support on a Mac OS X,
so you don't get them on OS 9.
They are compatible with
document modal printing,
so you get sheets.
And you can have multiple print
dialogs open at the same time,
same with page setup.
You can organize your controls in
your user face into multiple panels
with different titles on each panel.
So the user has a,
probably a better user experience
rather than having everything
crammed into one dialog.
If you're an application
or a printing module,
you can override the controls
in the printing dialogs.
Applications can override controls in
page setup and the printing modules
can override controls in both.
In printing only.
Applications can also override
controls in the print dialog.
And eventually, hopefully fairly soon,
we will have implemented code to handle
interdependencies between the extensions.
So if you have user options that depend
on other user options in the dialog,
we will notify you when you need
to update your settings because
something else has changed.
So what does a printing
dialog extension look like?
All the printing dialog
extensions are based on CFPlugin.
CFPlugin is the preferred mechanism for
creating plugin code modules on OS X.
And it is to some extent based on,
actually to a large extent,
based on the Microsoft COM plugin model.
So this diagram here gives you
sort of a real basic overview
of what that might look like.
The primary entry point for any
CFPlugin is the factory function.
The purpose of the factory function is
to return an instance of an interface.
And once you get that,
you can then go ahead and get
a reference into the function
pointer table for your plugin.
Or rather, the host can get that.
So you publish, you basically export
a single entry point,
which is your factory function.
And then when we load your CFPlugin,
we do all the work to get a
hold of your function table
and jump into your routines.
Inside your plugin you'll
have the IUnknown interface.
This is a little piece of code
that sits up at the top of your
CFPlugin and provides the support
for the CFPlugin mechanism itself.
It handles ref counting,
increment and decrement,
and it also handles the
query interface function,
which gets the interface.
The rest of your interface
goes in below that.
There are some pieces that are
specific to the printing manager.
So any printing manager plugin will
use these particular functions.
And then following that are the functions
specific to your particular plugin.
So for printing dialog extensions you'd
have the PDE interface functions there.
If you were doing a different
kind of plugin like a printer
browser module plugin,
you would have the printer
browser module API.
And then of course the rest of it is the
implementation of all that good stuff.
Just a quick note on terminology.
We tend to use the words
PDE or the terms PDE and user
option sort of interchangeably.
A user option is really a collection
of controls that appears in single
panel in the printing dialogue.
Whereas a PDE technically is the
plug-in that implements those controls
and in fact one plug-in can implement
more than one set of user options.
So even though it tends to
be a one-to-one mapping,
it doesn't necessarily have to be.
I just thought I'd point that out
in case anybody's confused about why
we sometimes call them user options
and we sometimes call them PDEs.
There's a distinction.
So how do you load a PDE?
Well,
applications register their PDEs with
CFPlugin before you open up the dialog.
And then the printing manager will go
ahead and collect all the information
about them that it needs to.
It will actually load them and put them
into the dialog as the dialog comes up.
If you're a printer module,
we will load your plug-in for you.
So in CF parlance,
application PDEs tend to
be dynamically loaded and
printer module PDEs are static.
That is, their loading and their
registration occurs,
is all set up on the disk.
Whereas an application can go ahead and
register the PDE dynamically in runtime.
And finally,
if you're an application also,
when you load your user options,
they will, in the hierarchy of things,
override any other user options
that are of the same type.
Printer modules come second
and then finally the system
user options come last.
So here's the CFPlugin API as
I mentioned earlier.
The first thing is a factory function,
which as I said,
returns essentially a pointer
into a table that contains
these three other functions,
which is query interface, add ref,
and release.
So what you have to do as a
plugin writer is implement these.
What we have to do on our end in
the printing dialogs and for any
other of our host software that loads
plugins is call your factory function
to get back this pointer block.
So we're going to talk
about that in a little bit.
So the first thing is a query interface.
The query interface is a method that we
use to get a hold of the actual instance
for the API that we're looking for.
In this case, printing dialog extensions.
Add ref and release are there for
ref counting and the other thing is
that we're looking for a method that
It's bookkeeping.
Printing Manager Plugin API.
OK, all Printing Manager plugins have to
have these three functions implemented
at the top of their list of functions.
The first one is Get API Version, which,
as you might guess,
returns to us the version of
the API that you were using
when you created your plugin.
And you get that from the header file.
And you just return that constant.
That way we know what we're calling into.
Retain and Release, again,
are ref counting.
And those are implemented separately
in the event that you use two separate
objects to store the function tables for
your IUnknown versus your PDE interface.
So we can do ref counting
on the two for you.
If it turns out that's not the case,
then internally you just tie
them together and make them
count up the same thing.
So you have different ways
you can implement that.
Printing Dialog Extension API.
Okay,
so this is the actually important part.
Prolog is the first function
that you get called,
or first function of yours that will
get called by the printing dialogs
when they come up and load your plugin.
Prolog allows us to acquire
information about your plugin from you.
We will get things from you
like the creator code for your
for your printer module or for
your printer module or application.
A type code that identifies what kind
of user option you're implementing
so we know whether or not you're
going to override somebody.
Apple will provide a list of types for
our universal and standard user options.
So universal things like page
range of copies or orientation,
things like that.
So that if you want to override those,
you would provide a user option
with the same type and then we would
know to replace ours with that.
In addition,
you'll pass us the dimensions
of your user interface so we
know what the maximum range
that you want to display in are.
And one or two other things
that I can't remember offhand.
Anyway, so if you ask for more space
than we can provide you,
we won't load you right now.
We'll call you terminate function
and tell you why and then you can go
ahead and redesign your user interface
to fit in a little smaller space.
To the extent possible,
we will always try and accommodate you.
Initialize then gets called.
If we get your stuff
and everything's cool,
we'll call your initialize function.
And one of the things we'll
pass to you is a reference,
which you need to store and pass
back to us any time you call into
any printing manager functions
that your plug-in may have to call.
And we can talk about that in a second.
Oh, and one of the other
things you'll get passed,
which you supplied to us
in your prolog function,
is a context value.
So you create a context value.
It's basically a refcon.
You can do anything you want,
32-bit value.
You pass it to us in a prolog call,
and we will pass it to you in every
subsequent call we make to you.
So you can store global data or
whatever you want to in that.
So at initialized time then that's your
time to go ahead and load your controls.
We also supply you a user pane reference,
a reference to a control manager
user pane into which you have
to embed all of your controls.
So all of your controls for your
PDE will be embedded controls.
They will use the control manager, sorry,
the Carbon event model to receive events.
The application does not have to
support the Carbon event model,
but your PDEs do.
So you embed those in that pane.
That pane determines the pane
that will be displayed when the
user selects the panel from the
pop-up menu in the dialog box.
Just before your panel becomes visible,
you'll get an open call so you can
do anything you might want to do.
Just before your panel goes invisible,
you'll get a close call just in case
there's anything you want to do.
And let's see,
sync is an interesting one.
Sync is the call you get when
we want you to either read from
or write to the session objects,
either the page formatting object
or the print settings object.
And so this is how you'll get
one of these shortly after the
initialize call and you will be able
then to initialize your controls.
Likewise, when your controls change,
you can request a sync call if you
detect that something has changed
that you want to notify us about.
And when you request that sync call,
that's one of those callbacks
I was just telling you about,
you pass your reference,
you will then get a call into your sync
function so that you can then update
the page format or print settings object
depending on which dialogue you're in.
This function becomes even more
interesting later on when we
provide dependency handling,
which I'll talk about a little bit later.
[Transcript missing]
So, this is basically a very simple
printing dialog extension.
It has a single control in it for,
just basically for
demonstration purposes.
Up at the top of the
function we're going to,
well we have all our declarations
and all that good stuff.
Oh yeah.
Let's see,
do we actually define this part?
We defined this part earlier, I think,
someplace.
No, it's down farther.
In the custom Info.plist file
for your plugin,
if you're doing a printer module,
printing dialog extension,
you have to define these various
This is the ID for your factory
function and you specify the name
of the actual factory function here.
Then down below,
you tell it which types of
plug-in that factory function
can return API instances for.
And here's the same ID for the
factory function here and here.
And this is the type for the
printing dialog extension plug-in.
So all of your printing dialog extensions
will have this value on the left,
and then you'll have an ID for
your plug-in factory on the right.
We make some notice in here
about how you may want to
During your prolog call,
open up your resource fork to get data
for your controls and so forth and so on.
And you can do that with
some sample code here.
We show you how to define
a bundle identifier
uh... which has to be specified in the
C... uh... plist file and uh... then
from inside the code you can actually
do CFBundle get bundle with identifier.
You pass at that bundle identifier and
you get a bundle reference and then you
can do CFBundle open bundle resource
map to actually get the resource file
and you get back a resource manager
reference number just like the good old
days and uh... then you can do cure res
file and all that good stuff And you use
CFBundle to close the resource map again.
So up at the top of the file
we have the ad ref function
for the I unknown interface.
And you'll notice that it basically
takes this object here and
increments the ref count field in it.
So, add ref just increments
the ref count and release
will decrement the ref count and at
zero it will unregister the factory.
Unregister the instance
for the factory function.
So that's pretty much
standard boilerplate.
Any CF plug-in that you do is
going to have to do the same thing.
So I encourage you to go read
the CF plug-in documentation
for how to do this.
Eventually it was hoped that the
Project Builder System will be able
to generate CFPlugins directly and
a lot of this sort of crufty stuff
at the top will be taken care of
for you by the compiler and linker.
Then following that we have
the Printing Manager's,
Printing Manager plugin APIs for
retain and release which do
very much the same thing.
Get API version here basically
takes a PM plugin API version
object and populates it with
the constants from the header.
So you just load this thing
up and then you return it.
These values are very similar to
the verse resource values that we've
been using all along in Mac OS.
Create plugin interface.
I don't want to spend a whole lot
of time looking at CFPlugin stuff,
but basically you create
what's called a Vtable.
That terminology is vector table.
It's pretty common for C++ sort of stuff.
But basically you create this function
pointer table and you populate it with
pointers to your various functions
and you return a pointer to that as
part of the query interface call.
When we call into your query interface
function asking for a specific API,
we'll get back a pointer into that
function table and that way we'll
have access then to all your printing
dialog extension API functions.
So here's the factory function.
And it creates the IUnknown Vtable
that we initially get back through
which we call query interface.
One of the interesting
things about query interface,
I guess I'll just point out real quick,
to the extent that anything about
query interface is interesting,
is that it goes ahead and it compares,
it looks at the type of API that
you're asking for and returns
the appropriate pointer based
on which type you asked for.
So a given factory function
can return different kinds of
APIs depending on your plug-in.
In this case,
you'll likely only have the one,
but CF plug-in allows you to
have more than one in there.
Again,
this is a way you would implement perhaps
more than one user option in a given PDE,
right?
You'd have a factory function
that would return more interfaces
or you'd have more than,
yeah,
you'd be able to return more than one.
So the first of the printing dialog
extension functions that we're
interested in here is the prologue.
And as you can see, okay,
so we have the creator,
the context code that
we expect back from you,
the creator, the user option kind,
the title, that's what I forgot,
I knew there was something,
and the max and min extents.
The title is the title that you're
going to see in the pop-up menu.
For universal and standard user options,
we provide the title,
and we'll simply ignore
anything you pass back.
So the title really is meaningful
only if you're implementing a
custom print dialog extension.
The intent is to provide a uniform,
constant location for the user to be
able to find certain types of features,
like print quality or paper source.
So we will provide the title,
we'll localize it and
all that good stuff,
and it saves you the trouble if that's
all you're doing is overriding an
existing one or providing a standard one.
If you're doing a custom,
you're on your own.
You provide us a title, we'll display it.
Okay.
So we initialize our context,
we fill in our max and mins,
we get our title with CFString up here.
And we put in a creator
and if we had an error,
we return an error.
So,
next thing we get is an initialized call.
Uh, and we pass in that context
code that you supplied us with.
Uh, also some flags which tell
you certain things about,
or we get back from you certain flags
which will tell us what you'd like to
be able to do and various other things.
Those flags are defined
in the header file.
We pass you your reference number,
so that's your special reference number.
Don't lose it.
And we give you a user pane into which
you can draw and the print session.
So you can get your initialization
from the print session objects there.
So, you check, first thing you do is
you get your context,
you check to make sure
your context is cool.
If you need to,
you can save off a copy of the
pointer to the window by doing get
control owner from the user pane.
You can get your boundaries for your
user pane here and save those off.
And right here we're keeping
a copy of them around.
This function here is
our internal function.
It gets our little--it just
gets a rectangle that defines
the bounds of our control.
And then we create a
new control right here.
And we save our...
Reference off inside our context.
The next thing we do is we embed
our control into the user pane.
And we make our control visible because
the user pane will be invisible.
Your control won't show up
until we decide to show it.
So you go ahead and set yours to be
visible as soon as you've embedded it.
And that way when we bring up the
user pane it will actually show up.
If you make your control invisible,
then you could make it visible
when you get your open call,
but it makes life easier for you
if you just do it right away.
And we don't have any
particular flags to set here,
so we just do that.
And we make an internal call to
our own sync function inside this
PDE here to initialize our values
so you can reuse your code that way.
So that works.
I get summary text.
Again, you get your context.
Whoops, a little too far.
And we expect back from you
a couple of CFArrayRefs.
So you're going to create two arrays,
one array of titles,
one array of summary strings.
And the title corresponds
to the particular control,
and the summary string will tell us
what the value of that control or
what the setting on that control is.
And we will display all that
text in the summary pane.
So you'll get a call to get
summary text when the user actually
brings up the summary pane.
If the user never does it,
you'll never see this call.
Again, you use CF to create the array,
get your control value,
push your strings in here,
Here's your title for the
control and stick them in the
pointers provided and return.
Sync gives you a context
and a print session.
So from the print session,
you can get all the relevant objects
that you need to reference in
order to get your control settings.
and a Boolean to
re-initialize the plugin.
Okay, so the Boolean tells you
which way you're going,
whether you're reading or writing.
Okay, if it's true, you're reading.
If it's false, you're writing.
So.
And so here we go.
There are going to be probably somewhat
slicker ways to get the print objects out
of the print session in the final APIs,
but right now,
we just grab them out of there.
And then we do a PM ticket get Boolean
to find out what our setting is.
And then we set the control value to
one of the two values-- true or false,
essentially.
This else statement is
the else that says-- OK,
so that's if we were reading.
If we're writing, we go to the control,
we get the control value,
and then we set the print settings
ticket either with a true or false value.
Here's the open call.
And as you can see,
we decided that we really don't need to
do anything when the open call comes,
but there it is anyway.
You still have to implement it.
I mean, if you don't implement it
and the pointer is null,
then we won't obviously be calling you.
But, you know, it'd be nice to--it's
there if you need it.
It's basically just a hook.
And close, same thing,
we decided we didn't need
to do anything there.
And terminate, as you can see,
we get a status and the context.
The status will tell you
why you're being terminated.
And if you've been a good boy or girl,
you'll get a no error
there and that'll be fine.
And if you do get an error there,
there's not a whole lot
you can do about it.
It's purely for your information.
It's mainly a debugging tool so that you
know that you've done something wrong.
Assuming of course that everything
survived long enough for us
actually to call you at that point.
Let's see.
Then you dispose of your controls,
dispose of your context, and return.
And here we have some of
our internal functions,
how we initialize our context,
we just do a new pointer, and so forth.
So I think that's enough of that.
So we can go back to the slides, please.
So, in summary,
with Printing Dialog extensions,
use standard control
manager controls calls,
You'll be using,
you'll be embedding your controls
into a user pane so that we can
show it and hide it easily and we
don't have to know anything about
what your hierarchy looks like.
Use the Carbon event
model to handle events.
For the most part,
you probably won't even need
to handle events unless you're
doing something special with the
control where you actually need
to intercept events and so forth.
If you do,
you need to write an event handler.
Apps do not need to support the
Carbon event model in order to use these,
but the PDE itself does.
So even if you're not, you know,
even if you're an application
that's using the old style events,
you'll still work fine if you have
your own PDEs and you want to load
them and get events and all that.
That'll all work.
You synchronize with
the PM session objects,
the page format and print settings
objects in your sync call,
either reading or writing data,
and provide useful
summary text for the user.
Useful, localized summary text.
So that when the user
brings up a summary pane,
he'll be able to tell at a
glance what your settings are.
Keep them short and sweet,
but informative.
Don't write tomes and tomes of stuff.
More don'ts.
Don't draw outside your user pane.
Please don't draw in our dialogue.
Don't try to talk to other PDEs.
Don't talk to strangers, right?
We are going to provide you with a
mechanism to register dependencies on
other types of user options and we will
automatically call your sync function
when those dependencies are triggered.
So don't go trying to read
other people's data to try and
figure out what's going on.
We'll let you know.
Don't write another PDE's data.
Don't go messing around with somebody
else's settings behind their back
because then we don't know that that's
happened and they don't know that
that's happened and everybody gets
really confused and things get messy.
If you have a user pane--user
panel controls in there,
try not to scroll controls.
Scrolling controls is
frowned upon these days.
Just try to fit everything
into your panel.
If you need another panel,
make another panel.
You can have as many as you like.
And don't bring up lots of extra
dialogues to try and get more
stuff on the screen if you can.
An alert is one thing, that's fine,
but don't have lots
and lots of dialogues.
If you need more dialogues,
add another panel.
You can have as many as you like.
And with that,
I'm going to hand it back over to Paul,
who is right here someplace.
So I've just got two things to
add to what Mike had to say.
First is that
We don't have it posted yet,
but I believe in a week or two you'll
find on the Carbon documentation site
there will be a very comprehensive and
complete write-up on how to develop PDEs.
And we'll get that
sample code out to you,
and I think you'll find
it rather easy to write.
And I would say,
just showing how easy it is to write,
that a few months ago I was, I guess,
brave enough to try to write
one when the code wasn't nearly
as organized as it is now.
And I even got my panel up on the screen.
Of course,
since then I think we've deleted it,
but...
Just proves that it's easy to do.
Now we would have had a Q&A session
but the clock in front of
me is saying that we've got,
let's see, 38 seconds to go.
There's a feedback forum and I wish
I could tell you where it was.
Maybe the next slide will tell us.
In A2.
So if you have more questions
about printing and certainly if
you have questions about graphics
or anything relating to the two,
I'd ask you to join us at
five o'clock in Hall A2.
Thank you very much.